It is possible that the term dot product is new to you, but after having watched the previous video,
the calculation of a dot product is not at all new to you.
In fact, what I have been calling a linear weighted combination in the previous exercise is literally
just exactly the same thing as the dot product.
Why do we need all these different terms for the same thing?
I don't know, it gets even weirder.
In the next video, I'll start calling it matrix multiplication.
That's just how it is.
Okay, so let me start by showing you some notations, some math notations for the dot product.
It is sometimes called the scalar product.
Sometimes you will see it notated as a dot b.
So this little dot in the middle.
Sometimes you will see it indicated with angle brackets like this.
And then a comma b.
And in these cases a and b are vectors of numbers.
Here is a common notation that you will see especially for in linear algebra contexts.
That is, a which is one vector, might be the activations vector, and then a t in the superscript,
and then b, which is another vector.
And that might be the weights from going into the neuron.
And then this is notation.
But it's also a definition of the dot product.
So it is the sum of element wise multiplications between all the individual elements in vector a and
vector b.
I will show you a concrete example in the next slide.
But yeah, just to, uh, burn into your brain that, uh, anytime you see a notation like this, so
a letter and then a t in the superscript and then another letter that is indicating the dot product,
which you now know is nothing more than a fancy term for linear weighted Awaited combination.
Okay, here is an example.
Let's say we have two vectors v and w.
Perhaps these are activations from one neuron.
And these are the weights from those neurons going into a neuron okay.
So the dot product it can be indicated as v t w the t stands for transpose.
I'll talk more about that in the next video.
And how do we actually calculate this.
So we take corresponding elements in the two vectors and multiply them together.
And then sum over all of the pairs of individual multiplications.
So the dot product between vector v and vector w is one times two plus zero times eight plus two times
minus six, and so on.
And you run through all of those calculations and you get minus five.
So the dot product between v and w is minus five.
Now, as you might have guessed from this slide, the dot product is only defined between two vectors
that have the same number of elements.
So here both of these vectors have five numbers in them.
So five elements.
But if you know imagine a situation like this where w only has three elements.
So then we get up here and the question is what do we multiply by five and by minus two.
And the answer is I don't know nothing.
So the dot product in this case is not defined.
Now there's nothing wrong with these two vectors.
But we cannot calculate the dot product between them because they do not have the same number of elements.
So this is a basic linear algebra dot products.
How does this relate to artificial neural networks and language modeling?
So the idea is that we have a simple artificial neuron, and it calculates an operation which is the
linear weighted combination of its inputs that are weighted according to some weights that are defined
or learned through training.
Now the question is, how do we actually express this mathematical operation that is calculated by this
neuron?
And the answer is that we express it as the dot product between the activations and the weights coming
into this neuron.
So we take all of these activations and we put that into one vector.
We take all the weights.
We put that into another vector.
And then we say that the mathematical operation that this neuron is calculating is literally just the
dot product between the activations and the weights, and that we can notate as x transpose w.
Or maybe you want to call this vector A for activations.
Sometimes people call this L minus one for the previous layer.
But this is the basic idea.
And what does that number actually mean?
What does the dot product mean.
How do we interpret a dot product?
Well, the exact interpretation of the dot product depends on the nature of the application.
It depends on the scale of the data.
But in general the dot product is a single number.
It's one number.
It doesn't matter how many elements are in the vectors, because the dot product will always produce
one number.
So it is a single number that reflects something about the commonalities between the two.
Objects that are representing the are represented by these vectors.
The dot product is all over the place.
It has myriad applications in many, many, many areas of applied math and abstract math.
The the dot product is the computational backbone for uh, in statistics analyses like correlation PCA
in signal processing, the Fourier transform and filtering, all based on dot products.
Geometry.
Physics.
Mechanics.
In linear algebra, projections, transformations, multiplications of matrices and vectors, all based
on the dot product.
And here in this deep learning course, you will see the dot product appearing every time we talk about
a forward pass through the model.
Convolution matrix multiplication.
A gram matrix, which is a way of extracting patterns from a weights matrix.
Cosine similarity.
This is a really important metric of similarity between embeddings and between vector representations
of language tokens inside the model.
Correlations the numerical representations of of letters and words and subwords.
Everything is based on the dot product and as you know from the previous video, the dot product is
literally just the weighted sum of two sets of numbers.
Okay, so now we are going to switch to Python and basically we are going to calculate a dot product
manually.
I put in quotes here because in my mind a manual calculation would mean like writing it out on a piece
of paper with a pen.
But we are basically going to calculate the dot product using several different methods.
In NumPy and in PyTorch.
And you will see that all of these internal toolbox provided methods are giving exactly the same results
as our manually calculated dot product.
You're also going to see that PyTorch is a little bit more sensitive to the data types.
So PyTorch really cares a lot about mixing ints and floats, for example, in ways that numpy is more
robust to.
Okay, so now we will switch to Python.
So we will be using numpy and PyTorch in this exercise in this code file.
So first of all I'm going to manually calculate the dot product.
So not using any special functions for the dot product between this vector of numbers and this vector
of weights.
Now notice that these are floating point numbers.
They all have decimal points in them.
And these are all integers.
There are no decimal points.
So these are ints and these are floats.
And let's see if we run into any Python errors because we are mixing different types of, of data okay.
So uh yeah I'm going to calculate this manually.
And here is the numpy function for calculating the dot product.
It is numpy dot dot.
Now in truth this doesn't really calculate the dot product.
It actually calculates matrix multiplication in my humble opinion, this is a confusingly named function,
but you can implement matrix multiplications through the dot product.
So as you will learn in the next video.
So it's it's a little bit confusing.
But anyway the function is called numpy dot dot.
Okay.
And here you see that.
Yeah we get the same results when we do our manual calculation.
You seen this kind of code now several times in the past videos.
And also using numpy dot.
What I want to do here is show you the inner workings of the numpy dot dot function.
So we can write the name of the function and then question marks at the end.
That in Colab at least, is going to open up this separate window off to the right, which tells us,
yeah, it gives us information about using the function, shows a few examples to help us get started.
And in some cases we'll also show the actual source code, but not for all functions, because some
functions are compiled for speed and simplicity.
Okay, so this is something you can look over, but just something I wanted to remind you about in Python
in general to check out the, uh, the the help from these files.
Okay.
So now I'm going to repeat this in PyTorch.
Now the thing is, when we are working in PyTorch, we are not going to be using numpy array data type
because it's a different library.
So here I'm creating a tensor in PyTorch using Torch.tensor.
I'm inputting a list.
But this list will get converted to a PyTorch tensor.
Same with this list over here.
And you can see these are the same numbers that I had up here in numpy.
So of course we expect that PyTorch will give us exactly the same results.
Okay.
And then you know this is very similar to what I showed above.
But here I'm using some instead of numpy some.
And here I'm using torch instead of of numpy dot dot.
Okay so run this code.
And now we get an error and the error is expected both vectors to have the same dtype.
That stands for data type but found long and float.
So what does this tell us.
This tells us also you can see which line actually crashed.
It was this line here.
This line ran fine.
So we could actually multiply these two terms element wise.
I will even comment this out and let's do this.
So here we see this function actually worked even though we have ints and floats over here.
This multiplication was no problem.
And torch some was also no problem.
And the result was a floating point number.
But torch dot dot is not as flexible.
And it was complaining about a difference in data type.
Now torch calls ints long so an integer.
What we would call an integer in numpy is called an integer in PyTorch.
It is called long torch dot long.
Okay.
So what we can do here to get this to work is specify an optional additional input in Torch.tensor which
is dtype equals torch dot float.
So now this and now I can show you this uh activations.
We can see this variable now has periods.
So here there are no periods.
Here there are periods.
So the period tells you that we're working with a floating point number.
I could do a long like this.
We get that error but that's fine.
I just wanted to show you that this value or this vector activation is integers.
There are no more decimal points over here.
Okay.
But nonetheless, when we make this torch dot float, then torch dot dot.
Actually works.
And then that gives us no surprise.
The same result of 1.6.
So you saw in this video that there are several notations for the dot product.
There are reasons in mathematics for having multiple notations for the same operation.
But that is not something that I'm going to get into here.
But importantly, the dot product is just a fancy term for linear weighted combination.
You also saw that it's such an important operation that libraries like NumPy and PyTorch have built
in functions for calculating the dot product.
And also this is something you will encounter all throughout your adventures using PyTorch, that PyTorch
can be more sensitive to the data types than numpy, and you will get lots and lots of coding errors
that are attributable to mixing data types.